Chapter 1 Notes:

3 different types of machine learning
  1. unsupervised learning (UL)
  2. supervised learning (SL)
  3. reinforcement learning (RL)


Supervised Learning:

supervised learning goal: learn from a model from labeled training data
that allows us to make predictions about unseen or future data.

In SL, sample data desired output labels are already known.
Example, a set of emails marked spam or not spam are already correctly labeled.

A subcategory of SL is regression, "where the outcome signal is a continuous
value". (Also called regression analysis)

Another subcategory of SL is classification where the goal is to predict
the categorical class labels of new instances based on past observations.
Email spam would be an example of a binary classification task.

Character recognition would be an example of multi-class classification, where
input (aA-zZ) can be categorized by the predictive model under the appropriate
letter.

In Regression Analysis, there are predictor (explanatory) variables and a
continuous response variable (outcome). The goal is to find a relationship
between those variables to predict an outcome.

Example: Math SAT score prediction of students. An explanatory variable
would be time spent studying and the final score would be response variable.
The model learned could be used to predict the scores of future students.

Linear regression takes a predictor (x) and a response (y). On the graph,
a straight line can be fitted to the data to minimize the distance between
the sample points and the line.


Reinforcement Learning:

reinforcement learning goal: develop an system/agent that improves it's
performance (actions) based on interactions in the environment

There is reward signal that isn't inherently right or wrong. The signal
is measured by how well the action was measured by the reward function. An
agent can use RL to learn a series of actions that maximizes reward through
trial-n-error or deliberate planning in the agent's environment.

Example: Chess engine, where player-bot is the agent, environment (state space)
is the chess board, moves are the actions, and the reward is win/lose.



Unsupervised Learning:

UL works with unlabeled data, where using UL techniques extracts meaningful
info without a known outcome variable (supervised learning) or a
reward function (reinforcement learning).

Clustering: organizes unknown data into groups.

Example: Marketers can discover customer groups based on interests in order
to develop distinct marketing programs

dimensionality: an observation that comes with a high number of measurements
or features

Dimensionality Reduction: an approach of feature pre-processing to remove
noise from data. Helps with limited storage space and computational performance
of certain ML algorithms. This method can also be used to visualize data, such
as compressing 3D data onto a 2D subspace.



Feature Matrices: each row is a sample where each feature is stored as separate
column

An ML system: data preprocessing-> learning -> evaluation (model) -> prediction (new data)

